In this lesson, we'll talk about the benefits of self managed WordPress hosting and grid pain in particular.
You'll see why self-managed hosting is the most versatile, flexible and cost effective for hosting
multiple websites and also the highest performance.
By the end of this video, you'll understand how you might leverage grid pain in your business or how
you might grow into it once you have several websites to host.
Let's talk about the details of self-managed WordPress hosting and specifically grid pain at Grid PenCom.
You can get a 14 day trial to check it out and set up some servers and some sites to look at all the
features and the benefits of using a system like this.
But let's go over how it works.
First of all, and this is available right across the top, under how it works under their website.
Basically, you create your servers, you connect an infrastructure provider or a server company like
digital ocean or up cloud or a WC with Amazon.
There's a few others or really any other server provider that you'd like to use, and then you create
your website sites, your WordPress sites on those servers.
And then third, and this is a big one.
There's engineers on support 24-7.
There's an extensive knowledge base.
There's a great community help center where the support engineers at grid pain are in there, helping
people all the time and at the certain developer level and higher.
You've got 24-7 ticketing support from engineers that know WordPress and know servers and system administration.
And so if we go into creating servers, let's just go over a few of the benefits and then I'll give
you a tour of my grid pain account so you could see how I'm using it and why I'm using it again.
I would recommend that you start looking at self-managed WordPress hosting.
If you're hosting or planning to host 10 or more WordPress websites, it really becomes the most affordable
way and the most powerful and speedy way of hosting WordPress websites.
And so you choose your provider, Digital Ocean or Vulture, Leonard, Amazon, LightSail Up Cloud,
or even a custom virtual private server.
It's basically cloud hosting that you control with full transparency.
There's there's nothing hidden.
There's no number of visits, limitations, really.
You just have to use their systems to monitor the resources you're being that you're using on your servers
and then upskill if you need to.
You can easily move sites around clone sites to different servers or to different domain names.
There's so many benefits all to all of this, you'll see this is a really, really awesome thing that's
not included or managed by any WordPress hosting that I know of other than grid pain.
This is something that is a high availability setup.
Up high availability is traditionally has been used for dedicated servers.
Companies that have system administrators on staff to be able to manage systems like this.
But for the layman and for someone who doesn't like me who doesn't do anything technically as far as
programming the software that works on the server.
Listen to what this does.
So this you combine this with your DNS system and basically what you have is you have two copies of
your entire server that might be 10 websites, 20 websites or 40 websites on a server that you're managing
individually.
But at the server level, you can have a completely synchronized even by the hour set of servers, say
two servers, one is the primary server, and the second is the failover server.
What that means that is that if there is any issue as far as traffic not being able to open any of the
websites on the original server, the traffic gets immediately routed to the second server in a failover
type of scenario.
And so you have a backup server that's again constantly synchronized and available in the seconds for
any visitors that can't open the original website.
Setting this up without any code and without having to know how to program it is just amazing.
I'd love to show you around my good paying account, just to show you some of the things that I have
here and how it works a little bit now.
The main difference with self-managed WordPress hosting is that you are setting up your own servers
and you're paying for those separately, so we can talk about the pricing just a little bit and I did
in the hosting introductory lesson as well.
But as far as grid pain goes.
Starting at the panel level, there panel costs $50 a month for you to access these functions in the
grid pain control panel and then you need to pay separately for your servers.
And so if you, for example, want to set up, you know, a digital ocean server, you've already set
up your connection here and let me just go back and show you under my settings right here under my account,
I can look at my integrations and I've showed you this a little bit.
I've got certain cloud providers, Vulture Digital Ocean, I have set up and up cloud.
I have setup.
Those are my three server companies, in addition to one that's not automatically integrated, called
over for a large, dedicated server I use for the students sandboxes.
But in any case, since those are already set up, I can go into my servers area and if I'm ready to
set up a server, I can just go to one of my providers.
I can, you know, click in and look.
Name the server and then start to select my plan.
And now I'd recommend that you go with a four gigabyte ram plan.
At a minimum, that's a $20 server, $20 per month, and you can easily host 20 to 40 websites on a
$20 a month server at digital ocean or vulture or up cloud anywhere you want to.
And so one of the things that you can do is you can spread your web sites to different servers in different
locations around the world or wherever your website visitors are mostly from.
And therefore, you can actually spread them around so much that say, you know, I had an outage or
something like that.
You can have this automated, automated failover system set up, but as well you can easily and with
one click clone your sites from one server to a different server and move sites around so fast it's
at way different than migrating WordPress that we're going to learn later in the course in the whole
migration section.
But now that I have multiple sites set up in great pain, I can really easily just clone them over from
one server to the next and arrange to close different servers, open other servers up.
They're actually charged by the minute and not by the month in this industry.
And so, you know, as soon as I shut off one of these servers and spin up a different one, my my money
is pro-rated.
You know, they bill per month, but they charge you per minute.
And so it's easy to move sites around between servers.
You also get this great monitoring program pre-installed, called Monit, which gives you some, you
know, the CPU usage, the load and the memory usage on your server, as well as a whole lot of information
about the space used what the server has.
This is, you know, the minimum I would use.
I would fit 20 to 40 sites on a server like this with, you know, two CPU cores and four gigabytes
of memory.
And that comes with 80 gigabytes of storage, plenty of space for 20 to 40 websites on WordPress.
And so here in my great pain, this is where I would set up a server.
Now, if I look at sites, if I go down at look at all of my sites, you know, what I might do is just
look at my own sites under the leveraged WP brand if I were to look at any of my sites right here.
It opens a site's control panel where I have all of these controls across the top for my sites.
It shows my IP address.
It shows the name of the server where I have this site configured and there's certain settings across
the top here, you know, using the engine next page, caching something back at, you know, under
creating web sites.
This is something now that we're on the site's screen at grid pain, I wanted to go down and show you.
So website isolation, keeping your individual web sites isolated and secure.
We created individual system users, and so that's where you can fit 20 to 40 websites on a single server
and they are virtually private, meaning VPNs, virtual private servers.
And so in a way, it's like your own private shared hosting.
But honestly, it's not shared.
We're we're sharing resources on the server.
But that server can be expanded in at a moment's notice, so it's scalable so way better than shared
hosting.
You can also control, like I said, which sites are hosted on which servers and move them around in
an instant using the cloning feature feature, which I'll show you in a minute.
And so web application firewalls, those are things that prevent, you know, login page attacks that
can eat up your resources.
It really before the bad traffic ever hits your WordPress website or uses any of the resources like
like pulling pages from your database or anything, it disappears.
It gets filtered out from these web application firewalls or waifs at the server level.
And so it's super fast.
Websites are available with with really the most advanced caching programs that have been built for
WordPress.
The bundles are kind of like what they call blueprints at Flywheel, so you can create bundles of plugins,
themes and ways that your installations are customized so that when you create a new site, it's got
everything you want in it, and you can even create the multiple bundles to be able to turn on and off
different plugins or themes that you're using or not using on particular websites.
Of course, one click staging would be here just like in managed WordPress and in some of the higher
tier site ground staging plans.
Staging is super important and really easy.
You can even use it as kind of an instant backup at any time if you want to make some changes.
Just create a staging copy and make some changes there test to make sure everything is good.
Then you can either deploy that back and overwrite the live side, or you can just leave that as your
testing environment and just do what you did on the real site because you've practiced it once it makes
it so easy to to work back and forth between live and staging.
The backups are pretty crazy if you read more deeply into it.
There's the, you know, divide up backups even by the minute.
As far as your WordPress websites being divided up into all of these tiny little files and stored on
the server to be restored bill back to the server at any point.
So, you know, they'll save, you know, hourly backups.
They'll save back in time for a month, they'll save weekly backups back in time for months and they'll
save, you know, yearly backups.
So there's all these restore able backups just automatically saved to your server and they are automatically
trimmed out of the back end.
So you always have your current set of backups up to the minute or hour however you want to define it,
as well as older backups get deleted when the new ones are created, and so you don't waste any server
space in that way.
You know, the DNS we'll talk about in the next section with domains and DNS.
They have a Cloudflare and DNS made easy integrations that make it super easy to migrate and move websites
around and have, you know, instant no downtime changes as far as either migrating websites, changing
email hosting or email systems and other things you might do.
And so there's so much that you can do and do your own research on grid pain, but highly recommend
it.
And we go with security.
This is what I was talking about before.
You know, there's the 6G or 7G web application firewall.
I don't actually have turned on right now at the moment, but I should add leverage WP, the IP settings
that I mentioned right here.
Here's my backup systems where I have hourly and then they're saved in the system.
I can define at what minute of the hour those are done so that my sites that are on the same server
don't occur at the same time.
And this cloning feature is just amazing.
You know, I can, I can, you know, clone a website at the same domain name to another server where
it's not currently hosted.
I just click that Migrate Clone Now button, and in a few minutes I have an exact copy, with the database
working correctly and named correctly with that domain name at a different server, I could click and
here under new site URL, I could place a say and move it to a new site URL at either the same server
or a different server and migrate that over.
And you can even clone an existing site and overwrite another site that set a domain name and then you
choose your domain name there.
So the cloning feature is quite amazing at good pain.
You control your domains here where you're connected with the API, and you can manage your DNS settings
even externally through this API connection to Cloudflare or DNS Medici.
Like I said, those are the two really the two fastest time to first byte DNS providers in the world.
And so that's why good pain integrates with them.
Control your Secure Sockets layer or your SSL certificates here with Let's Encrypt and then a wildcard
certificate if you're using subdomains like with a multi-site installation.
And there's all kinds of ability to enable and disable the WP debug functionality with just one, click
here and then.
View the logs, all these logs, in case there are any errors or you want to see what's going on in
the background are just OpenTable right here.
The say it has super good support for a subdomain or subdirectory, multi-site installations at grid
pain and then a little bit further along.
There's the new features that they have underbody you can use and sign up for over there.
And so to make a long story longer grid pain is amazing if you're going to be hosting multiple WordPress
web sites.
I can't recommend a hosting provider more highly than grid pain.
In fact, there's a great community on Facebook, with people discussing ways to leverage WordPress
and leverage grid pain.
The founder of Great Pains always in there.
This is just an amazing company that is really they've built this proprietary software stack.
They give you a great control panel without having to use any code, and then they're fully transparent.
You can see exactly what resources you're using at each server and then expand or contract those as
necessary and again, move your sites around between servers and among your servers at will.
And so if we talk about how that works, as far as you know, you know, looking at the pricing page
once again as we end this lesson for an example, if you've got the panel plan and say you have a $20
server, just one where you're going to host, maybe, you know, 20 to 40 websites say you're hosting
20 websites and they're paying you a minimum, say they're paying you just, you know, to $25 a month
for those 20 websites.
So that's $500 a month of income where you only have to pay $70 a month.
And so you could see how that can expand into the future.
The the developer plan is really what I'd highly recommend if you're hosting 10 to 100 to 1000 WordPress
websites because it is so affordable when you're able to scale and you don't have to pay a markup on
your servers.
So, you know, a company like Managed WordPress at Flywheel is using these same exact servers that
we're using over here at grid pain.
They are plugging into the same servers, and they're loading up their customers onto servers at a rate
of, you know, 20 to 40 to 80 to 500 sites on each server.
They're just not being very transparent about the resource usage.
They just will look at how many visitors you have to each site and how much storage space you're currently
using and just escalate you up to the next level higher without really being transparent about the server
space and the resource usage on those servers.
However, it's a good solution if you want a totally done for you.
Way to do it now.
Great pain to me is like managed WordPress.
It has all the benefits of a done for you service, but it has the transparency of you being able to
control where your websites are located, what server resources and what servers they're hosted at.
So you really get the best of all worlds with self-managed hosting at Great.